= Resat

= DESCRIPTION

== Synopsis

Resat is a script engine which allows grouping web requests into <b>scenarios</b>.

A scenario consists of serie of HTTP requests called <b>steps</b>.

Each step may be associated with <b>guards</b> and/or <b>filters</b> and/or <b>handlers</b>.

The syntax used to defined scenarios is simple and can be used by programmers and
non-programmers alike. See the WRITING SCENARIOS section below for examples.

* Guards keep making the same request until the response header and/or body
  satisfy(ies) certain conditions.

* Filters validate the response and may save some of its elements in variables.
  Variables can be used to define requests, guards and filters.

* Handlers allow writing custom code to handle a request and its response.

Scenarios are defined as YAML documents that must adhere to the Kwalify
schemas defined in <tt>schemas/scenarios.yaml</tt>. See the comments in this
file for additional information.

Resat is configured through a YAML configuration file which defines
default values that applies to all requests including the host name,
base url, whether to use SSL, common headers and body parameters and
optionally a username and password to be used with basic authentication.
This configuration file is located in <tt>config/resat.yaml</tt> by default.

== Why resat?

There are two main use cases for resat:

1. Scripting: Resat can be used to chaing together a serie of REST API calls
   that can be used to perform repetitive tasks.

2. API testing: For REST API implementors, resat is the ideal automated
   regression tool. This is the tool we use at RightScale to test our APIs.

== How to use

resat can be used as a ruby library or as an application. Using it as library
involves instantiating the engine and calling the 'run' method:

 require 'resat'

 options             = OpenStruct.new
 options.verbose     = false
 options.quiet       = false
 options.norecursion = false
 options.loglevel    = 'info'
 options.logfile     = 'resat.log'
 options.configfile  = 'config/resat.yaml'
 options.schemasdir  = 'schemas'

 Resat::Log.init(options)
 engine = Resat::Engine.new(options)
 engine.run('my_scenario.yaml')

 if engine.succeeded?
   puts engine.summary.dark_blue
 else
   puts engine.summary.dark_red
 end
 puts "#{engine.requests_count} request(s)."
 puts "#{engine.ignored_count} scenario(s) ignored."
 puts "#{engine.skipped_count} YAML file(s) skipped."

See the examples and usage sections below for using resat as an application.

== Examples

Run the scenario defined in scenario.yaml:

 $ resat scenario.yaml

Execute scenarios defined in the 'scenarios' directory and its
sub-directories:

 $ resat scenarios

Only execute the scenarios defined in the current directory, do not execute
scenarios found in sub-directories:

 $ resat -n .

== Usage

 resat [options] target

 For help use: resat -h

== Options

 -h, --help Display help message
 -v, --version Display version, then exit
 -q, --quiet Output as little as possible, override verbose
 -V, --verbose Verbose output
 -n, --norecursion Don't run scenarios defined in sub-directories
 -d, --define NAME:VAL Define global variable (can appear multiple times,
                       escape ':' with '::')
 -f, --failonerror Stop resat from continuing to run if an error occurs
 -c, --config PATH Config file path (config/resat.yaml by default)
 -s, --schemasdir DIR Path to schemas directory (schemas/ by default)
 -l, --loglevel LVL Log level: debug, info, warn, error (info by default)
 -F, --logfile PATH Log file path (resat.log by default)

= INSTALLATION

* <b>From source</b>: run the following command from the root folder to be able to run resat from anywhere:

 $ sudo ln -s `pwd`/bin/resat /usr/local/bin/resat

* <b>Using the gem</b>: 

 $ sudo gem install resat

= DEVELOPMENT

== Source

The source code of Resat is available via Git: http://github.com/raphael/resat.git
Fork the project and send pull requests to contribute!

== Dependencies

resat relies on Kwalify for validating YAML files:

 $ sudo gem install kwalify

* http://www.kuwata-lab.com/kwalify/

= WRITING SCENARIOS

At the heart of your resat scripts are the scenarios. A scenario consists of
one or more steps. A scenario may include other scenarios. A single execution
of Resat can apply to multiple scenarios (all scenarios in a given folder).

A simple scenario containing a single step is defined below:

 name: List all servers
 steps:
   - request:
       operation: index
       resource:  servers

The first element of the scenario is its name. The name is used by the command
line tool for update and error outputs.

The second element is the list of steps. A step must contain a request. A
request can correspond to one of the REST CRUD operations and apply to a
resource. CRUD operations are <i>create</i>, <i>show</i>, <i>index</i>, <i>update</i>,
and <i>destroy</i>.

Operations that apply to a single resource rather than to all resources require
the <i>id</i> element:

 name: Show server 42
 steps:
   - request:
       operation: show
       resource:  servers
       id:        42

Resat also allows defining <i>custom</i> REST operations for making web requests that
don't map to a standard CRUD operation. A custom operation is defined by a <i>type</i>
corresponding to the HTTP verb that the request should use (i.e. <tt>get</tt>, <tt>post</tt>,
<tt>put</tt> or <tt>delete</tt>) and its name.

 name: Twitter Timelines
 steps:
   - request:
       resource:  statuses
       custom:                         # Use a custom operation
         name:    public_timeline.xml  # Operation name
         type:    get                  # GET request

Alternatively, the path of a request can be defined manually:

 name: Twitter Timeline
 steps:
   - request:
       path: statuses/public_timeline.xml
       type: get

Requests can then be followed by filters which can validate the response and/or
extract elements from it.

 name: Get Mephisto ServerTemplate
 steps:
   - request:
       operation:      index
       resource:       server_templates
     filters:
       - name:         get server template href
         target:       body
         validators:
           - field:    server-templates/ec2-server-template[nickname='Mephisto all-in-one v8']/href
             is_empty: false
         extractors:
           - field:    server-templates/ec2-server-template[nickname='Mephisto all-in-one v8']/href
             variable: server_template_href

Variables that are extracted from a request response can then be used for
other requests, filters or guards. A variable is used using the <tt>$</tt> sign
followed by the variable name. A variable may be written to an output file if
it has the <i>save</i> element and the configuration file defines an output
file. A variable can also be exported to other scenarios that will get run in
the same Resat execution (so a scenario can create resources and save their ids
and a following scenario can reuse the ids to delete or update the resources).

The element to extract can be a response header or a response body field. If it
is a response body field then an XPATH query is used to identity which part of
the response body should be extracted.

The value to be extracted can be further defined using a regular expression
with a capture block. The regular expression is applied to the field matching
the XPATH associated with the extractor.

<b>Note</b>: Because XPATH is used to define fields in extractors and
validators, only requests that return XML can be followed by filters.

 name: Create Mephisto Server
 steps:
   - request:
       operation:      create
       resource:       servers
       valid_codes:
         - 201
       params:
         - name:       server[nickname]
           value:      'resat created server'
         - name:       server[server_template_href]
           value:      $server_template_href
         - name:       server[deployment_href]
           value:      $deployment_href
     filters:
       - name:         validate server response
         target:       body
         is_empty:     true
       - name:         extract server id
         target:       header
         extractors:
           - field:    location
             pattern:  '.*\/(\d+)$'
             variable: server_id

A scenario request can also use <i>guards</i>. A guard identifies a response
element similarly to an extractor (response header or body field identified by
an XPATH and optionally a regular expression). A guard specifies a value that
the element must match together with a period and a timeout that should be used
to retry the request until the value matches the guard or the timeout is
reached.

 name: Wait until server 42 is operational
 steps:
   - request:
       resource:  servers
       id:        42
       operation: show
     guards:
       - target:  body
         field:   server/state
         pattern: 'operational'
         period:  10
         timeout: 300
         name:    server operational

Finally a scenario request can include <i>handlers</i>. Handlers can only be
included when resat is used as a library. The handler definition lists a unique
name followed the corresponding ruby module name.

 name: Store servers definitions
 steps:
   - request:
       resource:  servers
       operation: index
     handlers:
       - name:    save results
         module:  ServersPersister

The ruby module must define a <tt>process</tt> method which accepts two arguments:

  def process(request, response)

* <i>request</i>: an instance of Net::HTTPRequest corresponding to the request associated with this handler.
* <i>response</i>: an instance of Net::HTTPResponse which contains the associated response.

It should also define a <tt>failures</tt> method which can return a list of errors. 
The errors will get logged and optionally stop the execution of resat if the 
<tt>failonerror</tt> option is set to <tt>true</tt>.

= ADDITIONAL RESOURCES

* Refer to the examples (http://github.com/raphael/resat/tree/master/examples)
  for fully functional and documented scenarios.
* See the file <tt>schemas/scenarios.yaml</tt>
  (http://github.com/raphael/resat/blob/master/schemas/scenarios.yaml) for
  the complete reference on scenarios syntax.

= LICENSE

Resat - Web scripting for the masses

Author:: Raphael Simon (<raphael@rightscale.com>)
Copyright:: Copyright (c) 2009 RightScale, Inc. 

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining
a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the
'Software'), to deal in the Software without restriction, including
without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish,
distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to
permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to
the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be
included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED 'AS IS', WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND,
EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF
MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.
IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY
CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT,
TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE
SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.
